JUDY WOODRUFF: But first: An
all-girls team from Afghanistan
finally made it to the U.S.
this week to participate
in a robotics competition.
Their visas were denied twice
by American officials, until
criticism prompted President
Donald Trump to intervene
and reverse the decision.
The girls joined high school
students from more than 150
other countries, many of whom
had never seen or
made a robot before.
Jeffrey Brown will look at some
of the immigration policy issues
this is raising once again.
But we start with special
correspondent Kavitha Cardoza
of our partner Education Week.
She spoke to some of the Afghan
girls and other international
students in Washington,
D.C.
It's part of our weekly
series Making the Grade.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Hundreds
of high school students
arrived in Washington
from across the globe,
robotics teams from Jamaica to
Jordan, Canada to Australia.
There was even one
representing refugees.
But none of the students had a
more unlikely journey, perhaps,
than the crowd favorite.
MAN: Team Afghanistan.
KAVITHA CARDOZA:
Sixteen-year-old Kawsar
Roshan, one of the six girls,
says this was her proudest
moment.
KAWSAR ROSHAN, Student (through
translator): I was very happy,
and I was proud when the
people supported us.
I'm happy when people feel
that Afghans can do something.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: This robotics
competition is part of an
effort to get more young people,
particularly from
underrepresented countries,
to enter STEM fields.
It's a term used to include
science, technology,
engineering and math.
A few months ago, all teams
received boxes containing
hundreds of identical parts, and
the students had to figure
out how to take the wheels and
gears, sensors and sprockets,
and create a robot.
FATEMAH QADERYAN, Student
(through translator):
We have an old computer,
but often it doesn't
work.
KAVITHA CARDOZA:
Fatemah Qaderyan is from
the Herat province.
Almost 40 percent of
school-age children don't
have access to education.
Even when they do, there's
often a shortage of
teachers and textbooks.
For many Afghan girls, Fatemah
says even getting to school can
be a challenge, because they
need a man's permission.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): We can't go alone.
And we need someone to support
us, like a man, to get us to
the school, or other places
we want to go.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Their
coach, Alireza Mehraban, says
technology is hard to come by.
ALIREZA MEHRABAN, Coach: We
don't have equipment of robotic.
We don't have it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: He says even
though these girls were chosen
from more than 150 students,
because the team has no
experience in robotics, some
doubted their abilities.
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: They say you
can't, because it's impossible.
For girls in Afghanistan,
can't do this, really.
It's too hard for us.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: And what did
you say when they said that?
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: We
say, we can do it.
Just we say, we can do it.
Just give us a chance.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Then, after
they built their robot, their
visas were denied twice.
They were not given
any explanation.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): When we
applied and were rejected,
we are so disappointed.
We are crying a lot
for six or seven hours.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Mehraban can
hardly believe they're here.
WOMAN: How do you feel
when everyone cheers
team Afghanistan?
ALIREZA MEHRABAN: What I have
to say, because the feeling
like I'm so happy, so happy.
I can't describe it best.
Really, I can't describe
it best, because a feeling
like I can't control myself.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Eighty percent
of these teams are made up
of boys, a gender gap that is
reflected in STEM
fields worldwide.
But the inequality in education
is far bigger than just STEM
subjects and Afghanistan.
Around the world, more than
60 million girls don't have
access to any education.
The reasons vary, from wars,
to cultural mores, to something
as simple as distance.
Melissa Lemus is
with team Honduras.
MELISSA LEMUS, Student (through
translator): Some of my friends
live about two hours from
the high school, or
they have to take a bus.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: While Gregine
Kumba Natt with team Liberia
says often they don't have
electricity during the day.
GREGINE KUMBA NATT, Student: We
need to charge the robots, but
in our country, we have poor
electricity.
We couldn't charge our phones
either, and because of that,
usually, we don't practice
at day.
We practice in the night hour.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: And like many
countries here, Ruby Balami
from team Nepal says her school
doesn't have a science lab, so,
initially, she was nervous when
she saw teams from developed
countries, such as
Japan and the U.S.
RUBY BALAMI, Student: We think
that they are much competitive,
and it was a scary thing,
but, coming here, making them
friends, now we have -- feel
much more better, and now
we are much more confident.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Some
last-minute tinkering
and intense discussions,
and then it was showtime.
Each country's team was paired
with two others, often not
speaking the same language.
Learning to collaborate and
communicate is part of the goal,
says Dean Kamen, the founder
of the competition,
FIRST Global Challenge.
DEAN KAMEN, Founder, FIRST
Global Challenge: You're the
first generation on this planet
that could grow up with
all of its kids knowing
each other, working
together, creating value,
so that you could all
have better lives, we
can have a better world.
And that's the
important thing here.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fatemah
loved meeting students
from other countries.
She says she knows people think
of Afghanistan as a place of
violence and poverty, but she
wants to change that perception.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): War like a habit
for us, because bomb blasting
and counterblasting and
killing people so normal for
us, because we see it a lot.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She believes
the only way that can
change is through education.
Her mother stopped at grade
six, and even now more than
three million children, mostly
girls, are not
enrolled in school.
But someday, Fatemah wants to
get a Ph.D. in computer science.
FATEMAH QADERYAN (through
translator): Because I
need this, our country
needs this, to have
women educated, to be new
generation in the future.
I want to show the world
what Afghan girls, or
young girls, can do.
We can show them, when we have
a creative idea, we can do it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For
the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Kavitha
Cardoza in Washington,
D.C.
JEFFREY BROWN: As Kavitha said,
the visa question for the Afghan
girls gained national attention
and the direct intervention
by President Trump.
Alan Gomez from USA Today
joins me now to talk about
that part of the story.
So, Alan, was this a
special case, an outlier?
What, if anything, does it
tell us about the current
situation with visas?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today:
Well, absolutely, this
was a complete outlier.
Understand that the Trump
administration has made clear
throughout its time that it will
handle any visa application
on a case-by-case basis,
exceptions can always be made.
But this case definitely
represents a very
sharp departure from
what has been a pretty
clear strategy from
this administration to
limit, to restrict, to
in some cases completely
suspend immigration from
terror-prone countries.
Now, understand that, you know,
we're still dealing with the
travel ban that the president
has been trying to implement
now for months that is directed
at six countries that have
been labeled as having very
close ties to terrorism.
He has completely suspended
the refugee program, all in
the name of national security.
And Afghanistan has
never been on any of
those lists of countries,
but, you know, I think
it would be pretty easy to make
a case that Afghanistan has a
bit of history with terrorism,
so that's why this case makes
it -- is so, so surprising
that it's threes girls from
Afghanistan that have been
allowed into the country.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I wonder,
do we even know yet why they
were denied visas originally?
ALAN GOMEZ: No, the State
Department generally
discuss individual
cases and why it makes
individual determinations.
But when you think about
the overall posture of
this administration to
seriously scrutinize
any visas, any visa applications
that are coming from countries
with those ties to terrorism,
it follows that trend of
denying a lot of those visas
from people coming from those
countries.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
this case raises some -- plays
into some larger confusions
and that continuing controversy.
I want to ask you about one
other development in the visa
world that came yesterday.
The government announced they're
adding 15,000 new H-2B visas.
Now, explain what's
going on there.
ALAN GOMEZ: Yes.
And that's just another example
of why it's so difficult to
try to figure out sort of
what direction this
administration is going
when it comes to the
legal immigration system
in the United States.
Just a couple of months ago,
to give you some background,
the president ordered a total
review of the H-1B visa program.
Those are visas dedicated
to foreigners who are
trained in science,
technology, engineering,
mathematics.
They're used by technology
companies to bring in computer
scientists and programmers.
And the Trump administration
ordered a review of the program
because they believe that there
is too much fraud and that
these technology companies are
abusing that program to just
import cheaper labor.
So, we had that
as the background.
They talk about
American workers first.
And that's sort of the
posture that they have
been proceeding under.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's H-1.
That's the H-1.
Now, this is H-2, which
is for temporary workers.
ALAN GOMEZ: Right.
And then, all of a sudden,
yesterday, we get this
announcement that they
are going to approve
15,000 additional new
visas for H-2B visas, and
these are dedicated to
lower-skilled workers.
Think about people who work
in fisheries, in hotels, in
construction, in resorts, and
those are the kind of workers
that they're going to allow in.
The argument from the Trump
administration is that these
companies, a lot of them were
in very desperate need of
the labor, that they couldn't
find American workers to do
that job, so they needed to
bring in these additional
workers to do it.
But, again, it sort of goes
against what the administration
has been arguing for all these
months, that they are going
to limit the immigration
system to help American
workers and to reduce
the competition that they're
facing here in the country.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, ever evolving.
Alan Gomez, USA Today,
thanks very much.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.